## Study objectives

The research questions this study will seek to answer are as follows:

- What is the relationship between water quality, measured by the EPT index, and water chemical quality, measured by nitrogen, phosphorus, and dissolved oxygen concentrations across freshwater sampling sites along the Mississipi river 100 km north of the Gulf of Mexico? 
**Prediction for Question 1:** We predict that the EPT index will vary in relationship to water chemical content. We predict that where concentrations of Nitrogen and Phosphorus are high, dissolved oxygen contents will be low (CHECK AND CITE!!!) which will cause an observation of low EPT index values. Conversely, in places where concentrations of Nitrogen and Phosphorus are low, we predict dissolved oxygen content will be high and thus cause an observation of high EPT values. 
The reasoning behind our predictions is that the taxa of Benthic Macroinvertebrates that the EPT index is based on are sensitive to chemichal disturbances; thus, changes in dissolved oxygen, phosphorus and nitrogen concentrations are expected to cause changes in the EPT index. Increased quantities of Nitrogen and Phosphorus have been shown to negatively affect water quality as they increase the concentration of Algae in the water system, which in turn decrease dissolved oxygen concentrations (CITE, YEAR). Furthermore, Dissolved Oxygen is positively correlated with EPT values (Horvat, Urbanic and Sivec, 2014). Given this fact, changes in Nitrogen and Phosphorus are expected to cause changes in dissolved oxygen content which in turn will elicit observable changes in the EPT index. 
      
- Is water quality, measured by the EPT index and chemical content, correlated with spatial land use in response to agricultural development?
**Prediction for Question 2:** We predict that water quality will be lower in spatial regions with high agricultural activity. This is because water quality is affected by a multitude of factors associated with this spatial descriptors, such as fertilizer and pesticide runoff from agricultural land.
